---
layout: post
title: "Day 6"
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

# Day 6

#### Note on continuous vs. discrete models

Discrete models look at the evolution of snapshots of the process at given times, while continuous models look at all the times in between that. For discrete models we look at difference equations, but for continuous models we look at differential equations. For the moment we will deal with discrete time models.

## Population

Let's go back to our models.

Let \\(l_x\\) be the probability of survival to age \\(x\\). We assume \\(l_0 = 1\\). For trees, for example, \\(l_x \approx \frac{1}{x}\\), but for humans the probability of survival to age \\(x\\) is quite steady until we reach a certain threshold.

Let \\(p_x\\) be the conditional probability of an x year old to survive another year. It is pretty clear that

$$l_{x+1} = l_xp_x$$

we can also write:

$$l_x = p_0\cdot p_1\cdots p_{x-1}$$

Let \\(m_x\\) be the expected number of offspring to an \\(x\\) year old individual. We will only look at the female population and offspring, because otherwise we would be counting population twice. We are not counting offspring until they are born and the age of the mother is taking when the birth occurs.

The expected number of offspring an individual will have over a life time is \\(\sum_{x\geq 0} l_0m_0\\). Let \\(f_x\\) be the expected offspring next year to an \\(x\\) year old. \\(f_x = p_x m_{x+1}\\).

Let \\(n_x(t)\\) the number of \\(x\\) year olds at time \\(t\\). We want to see how these evolve.

Imagine there were only two ages, then \\(n_0(t+1) = f_0n_0(t) + f_1n_1(t)\\) and \\(n_1(t+1) = p_0n_0(t)\\).

More in general we can use a Leslie matrix:
$$
\left(\begin{array}{c}
n_0(t+1)\\
n_1(t+1)\\
\vdots\\
n_x(t+1)
\end{array}\right) =
\left(\begin{array}{c c c c}
f_0 & f_1 & \cdots & f_x \\
p_0 & 0 & \cdots & 0 \\
0 & p_1 & \cdots & 0 \\
\vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\
0 & \cdots & p_{x-1} & 0
\right)\left(\begin{array}{c}
n_0(t)\\
n_1(t)\\
\vdots\\
n_x(t)
\end{array}\right)
$$

We can look at the eigenvalues of the matrix and the eigenvectors are stable age distributions. In the Fibonacci case, for example, we would have

$$
A = \left(\begin{array}{c c}
1 & 1 \\
1 & 0 \\
\end{array}\right)
$$
with eigenvalues: \\(\lambda_1 = 1.61\\) or \\(\lambda_2 = -0.61\\). The eigenvectors are orthonormal, and any evolution will be a combination of the two eigenvectors times a power of the eigenvalues. \\(c_1\lambda_1^n v_1 + c_2\lambda_2^n v_2\\). Since \\(|\lambda_2| < 1\\) the second term will diminish in importance and eventually the age distribution will be stable. But the second eigenvalue tells us how fast we relax to the first one.

The Perron-Frobenius theorem says that the largest eigenvalue will be always real and positive. 
