---
layout: post
title: "Day 11"
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

# Day 11

Remember from last week, we are talking about species competition.

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{dN_1}{dt} = \frac{r_1N_1}{K_1}(K_1-N_1-\alpha_{12}N_2) = F(N_1,N_2) \\
\frac{dN_2}{dt} = \frac{r_2N_2}{K_2}(K_2-N_2-\alpha_{21}N_1) = G(N_1,N2)
\end{align}
$$

We can do the isoclines and see there are (when there is contingent competition) four equilibriums (two stable, two unstable). There is a saddle and a line in which there is convergence to one of the unstable equilibriums. That line is an eigenvector of the linearized system, and it's called the separatrix.

There are three things we do when studying equilibriums:
### Equilibrium (or Steady State)

How many equilibriums are there? Obviously anytime \\(F(\bar{N}_1,\bar{N}_2) = G(\bar{N}_1,\bar{N}_2) = 0\\) we will have an equilibrium (because the derivatives of \\(N_1, N_2\\) will be zero)

### Stability

How do we know if these are stable? We could handwave our way into it through the plots. We could also use Taylor's theorem.

### Linearization

We use Taylor's theorem to linearize the system around the equilibrium:

$$F(N_1, N_2) = F(\bar{N}_1,\bar{N}_2) + \nabla F \cdot (N_1-\bar{N}_1,N_2-\bar{N_2}) + O((N-\bar{N})^2)$$

Let's call \\(n = (n_1,n_2) = (N_1-\bar{N}_1, N_2-\bar{N}_2)\\)

Our system of equations is now, near an equilibrium:
$$
\begin{align}
\frac{dn_1}{dt} =  F(N_1,N_2) = \nabla F \cdot(n_1,n_2) + O(n^2) \\
\frac{dn_2}{dt} =  G(N_1,N_2) = \nabla G \cdot(n_1,n_2) + O(n^2)
\end{align}
$$

So basically it is a linear system:
$$
\frac{dn}{dt} = \left(
\begin{array}{c c}
\frac{\partial F}{\partial n_1} & \frac{\partial F}{\partial n_2}\\
\frac{\partial G}{\partial n_1} & \frac{\partial G}{\partial n_2}
\end{array}\right)_{n=0} n
$$

The solutions are given by the diagonalized matrix and its eigenvectors. 
