---
layout: post
title: "Day 10"
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

# Day 10

*note: I missed last day and also the first 15 minutes of this day (my laptop decided it was essential that it restarted and updated everything)*

## Population, Harvesting, and profit

Remember our initial model for population growth of the harvested good:

$$\frac{dN}{dt} = rN(1-\frac{N}{K})$$

from which we harvest at a rate \\(H = \alpha EN\\) (where \\(E\\) is the effort, \\(\alpha\\) is the effectiveness of our effort). The population is now:

$$\frac{dN}{dt} = rN(1-\frac{N}{K}) - \alpha E N$$

In the equilibrium we have \\(\bar{N} = K(1-\frac{\alpha}{r}E)\\). Note that if we do no effort at all the population will reach its maximum and if we do the maximum effort \\(\frac{r}{\alpha}\\) then the population will be extinguished.

At the equilibrium, the yield of the harvesting will be \\(H = \alpha E K(1-\frac{\alpha}{r}E)\\). This is another parabola, we can maximize the yield when \\( E = \frac{r}{2\alpha} \\). However, we want to maximize our profit: \\(pH - C \\) where \\(C = cE\\). The maximum profit is attained at \\(\frac{r}{2\alpha}(1-\frac{c}{p\alpha K})\\).

#### Adding complexities

This model assumes that we care about the future as much as we care about the present. We can include a discount rate, and maximize \\(\int_{0}^{\infty} F(t)e^{-\delta t}dt\\). Our uncertainty about the future implies that we have a discount rate different than zero. There is no answer to what is the correct discount rate. Sometimes we could force species out of extinction when we choose a discount rate.

Another complexity is that our discount rate in the shorter term is higher than in the longer term. This is called hyperbolic discounting. There is also intertemporal inconsistency, where the current "me" discounts the same period in a different way as the future "me".

#### How do we measure the discount rate?

A possible question: "Would you prefer 100\$ now or 120\$ tomorrow?" etc. The hyperbolic discount rate is basically our answer to the question: "Do you prefer this now or ten hours from now?" vs "Do you prefer this next year or ten hours after next year". Also, averaging exponential curves leads to a hyperbolic discount rate.

#### Why should we discount hyperbollically?

When we make a decision we debate between instant pleasure/long time rewards. We "vote" every time we make a decision and thus we average different exponential discount rates.

### Adding species, competition, predator-prey, etc.

Volterra / Lotka worked out the dynamics of different species interacting. These are initial models (that can be improved) but a very good start. We start from our initial model \\(\frac{dN_i}{dt} = r_iN_i(\frac{K_i-N_i}{K_i})\\) (\\(i = 0,1\\)). The species now interact with each other:

$$ \frac{dN_i}{dt} = r_iN_i(\frac{K_i-N_i - \alpha_{i,1-i}N_{1-i}}{K_i}) $$

There is an isocline for each of the species defined by the line \\( K_i - N_i -\alpha_{i,1-i}N_{1-i} \\). Below the isocline \\(i\\) the species \\(i\\) will want to increase, above it the species will decrease.

The result of the competition will depend on whether the isoclines intersect or not. If they don't (in the right upper quadrant), one of the species will dominate. If they do, then depends on how they intersect: Either the intersection will be an unstable equilibrium and a bifurcation point (contingent competition) or *I want to plot this* they cohabitate.

#### Coexistence

In that case we have \\(\frac{K_0}{\alpha_{01}} > K_1 \\) and \\(\frac{K_1}{\alpha_{10}} > K_0\\). Therefore \\(1>\alpha_{01}\alpha_{10}\\).

The per capita effect of species 0 to itself is \\(\frac{1}{K_0}\\) and to species 1 it is \\(\frac{\alpha_{10}}{K_1}\\). This is an intuitive explanation of why we get coexistence: Each species' effect onto itself is greater than the competition's.
