---
layout: post
title: "Day 5: Population"
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

# Day 5
### Review: Population growth

We have a rule that explains the evolution of population from $N_k$ to $N_{k+1}$ where $k$ represents a generation. We can be interested in the transients or the asymptotic behavior. The asymptotic behavior looks at where $N_{k+1} = N_k$. This is a potential equilibrium (stable or unstable). We look at the slope of the curve at the equilibrium point to know if it is stable or unstable.

#### Adding time

Let's redo these models with more precision on time. Suppose we have a growth rate of \\(i < 1 \\) every year. After a year we would have $N_{k+1} = N_k(1+i). If the growth rate was applied every quarter, after each quarter we would have \\(N_{k+1} = N_k(1+\frac{i}{4})\\) so after a year we would have \\(N_{k+4} = N_k(1+\frac{i}{4})^4\\). We can take this to the limit if we receive the growth rate in a small increment of time: \\(\lim_{n\to\infty}(1+\frac{i}{n})^n\\)

We do something similar for the discrete logistic equation (now fixing an increment of time \\(\Delta t\\)).
$$N(t+\Delta t) = F(N(t)) = N(t)+r\Delta t N(t)[1-\frac{N(t)}{K}]$$

Note that the equilibriums are \\(0\\) and \\(K\\). \\(F(N) = N+r\Delta tN(1-\frac{N}{K})\\) has derivative \\(\frac{dF}{dN} = 1+r\Delta t(1-\frac{N}{K}) - r\Delta t\frac{N}{K}\\). At \\(N=K\\) the derivative is \\(\frac{dF}{dN}(K) = 1-r\Delta t\\). If \\(r\Delta t\\) is negative, \\(K\\) is an unstable equilibrium with no oscillations. For \\(r\Delta t\\) between 0 and 1 we have a stable equilibrium with no oscillations. For \\(r\Delta t\\) between 1 and 2 it is a stable equilibrium with oscillations, and for \\(r\Delta t\\) greater than 2 we have an unstable equilibrium with oscillations. For stability we need \\(0<r\Delta t<2\\).

As we make \\(\Delta t\\) go to zero, we obtain a differential equation: \\(\frac{dN}{dt} = rN(1-\frac{N}{K})\\). This equation behaves very well, and that is because \\(r\Delta t\\) is approaching zero so we always have a stable equilibrium with no oscillation.

#### Example

Suppose population doubles in size every year. Individuals give birth to two offspring at the end of the year and they die. Now compare to the case where individuals give birth to one offspring the first year, another offspring the second year and then they die. The models are:

For the first problem:
$$ N_{t+1} = 2 N_t $$
For the second \\(O\\) is old, \\(Y\\) is young.
$$
\begin{align*}
  &O_{t+1} = Y_t\\
  &Y_{t+1} = Y_t + O_t = Y_t + Y_{t-1}
\end{align*}
$$

This forms two Fibonacci sequences that tend to a stable age distribution (\\(\frac{Y_{t+1}}{Y_{t+1}+O_{t+1}}= \frac{Y_{t+1}}{Y_{t+2}}\\) tends to a limit). In the limit, where we assume \\(Y_t = x, Y_{t+1} = \lambda x, Y_{t+2} = \lambda^2 x\\) we can solve the equation \\(\lambda^2 = \lambda+1\\) with solutions \\(\lambda = \frac{1\pm\sqrt{5}}{2}\\). We are interested only on the positive solution which determines the growth rate of the population. This solution also determines the age distribution (\\(\frac{1}{\lambda}\\)). Note that the second has a slower growth rate than the first one

We can represent this using a Leslie Matrix:
$$
L = \left(\begin{array}{c c}
f_0 & f_1 \\
p_0 & 0 \\
\end{array}\right)
$$

Which explains how will the population evolve each time unit (\\(Ln_t = n_{t+1}\\)). These matrices lead to stable age distributions except when there is a pulse reproduction.
