---
layout: post
title: "Day 8"
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

# Day 8

Remember from last day that we can model the evolution of a population as \\(\mathbf{N}(t+1) = A\mathbf{N}(t)\\) (where \\(A\\) is a matrix). If there is no pulse reproduction, we know that in the limit the dominant eigenvalue will determine the exponential growth of the population.

To know how fast it relaxes we look at the ratio between the dominant eigenvalue of \\(A\\) and the second largest.

**Definition:** \\(R_0 = \sum_x l_x m_x\\)
**Property:** \\(R_0 > 1\\) if and only if the dominant eigenvalue \\(\lambda\\) is greater to 1. This is a very convenient magnitude because we don't have to do an eigenvalue decomposition of the matrix in order to know what will happen to the population as a whole.

This comes from Euler's equation: \\(1 = \sum_x l_x m_x \lambda^{-x}\\) that we saw last day.

In the continuous time version we would have \\(R_0 = \int_0^\infty l(x)m(x)dx\\) and Euler's equation is \\(1 = \int_0^\infty l(x)m(x)e^{-rx}dx\\), and \\(R_0 > 1\\) if and only if \\(r > 0\\)

**Definition:** The relative reproductive value (Fisher's Reproductive Value) of an individual at age \\(x\\) represents the discounted number of future girl children that will be born to a woman of a specific age. The function has a maximum at some age and is increasing before and decreasing afterwards. The reason is that the older an individual gets, the more likely is for her to die, but before some age the reproductive value is diluted by the fact that the individual won't have descendants until later. The formula is
$$\frac{v(x)}{v(0)} = \int_x^\infty \frac{l(y)}{l(x)}m(y)e^{-r(y-x)}dy$$

\\(\frac{l(y)}{l(x)}\\) is the conditional probability of surviving until age \\(y\\) given I've already lived to age \\(x\\). \\(m(y)\\) is the average number of offspring I will have at age \\(y\\). \\(e^{-r(y-x)}\\) dilutes by the population growth there will have been after \\(y-x\\) time.

### Going back to the logistic model (and harvesting from it)

Remember the logistic equation \\(\frac{dN}{dt} = rN(1-\frac{N}{K})\\). Suppose we want to harvest from this population, say \\(H\\) individuals per year. The equation is now \\(\frac{dN}{dt} = rN(1-\frac{N}{K})-H\\). Now we will have equilibriums in three points, two stable and one unstable. If we harvest when there is not enough population we will drive the population to extinction, but if we harvest when the population is big enough we will stabilize at a population (smaller than \\(K\\)).

Of course, being greedy, we want to maximize our harvest rate. The problem is that in the limit the stable and unstable equilibriums will be together and as soon as we drive the population a bit below the equilibrium we will make the population decline to extinction.

#### Regulating harvesting

How do we regulate this? It is difficult to regulate the number of catches, but it's less difficult to regulate the effort (number of boats, times for boats, etc.). Assuming the Catch per Unit Effort is also constant (equal to \\(\alpha\\)), our catch is \\(H = \alpha E N = hN\\) (note that the effort CAN be regulated) and our equation is now

$$ \frac{dN}{dt} = rN(1-\frac{N}{K}) - hN $$

This new model has now a unique equilibrium (not counting \\(N=0\\)) and it is stable, which allows us to find a *maximum sustained yield*, which would be the maximum harvesting rate we can obtain. Obviously this is not so optimal for the fish since their population is halved.

The equilibrium (any equilibrium, not necessarily maximum sustained yield) is attained at \\( N = K(1-\alpha\frac{E}{r}) \\). The maximum sustained yield happens when the population is \\( \frac{K}{2} \\) so at that point \\( \frac{1}{2} = (1-\alpha\frac{E}{r}) \\). Thus the effort needed for maximum sustained yield is \\( E = \frac{r}{2\alpha} \\).

#### Cost of harvesting

We consider now the harvester's point of view where they care about revenue as a function of effort. The curve is similar to the logistic one (if I put in a lot of effort I will drive the population down and thus get no revenue, if I don't put effort at all, I don't harvest anything). Again we can substract the cost from the revenue. But then we can always do more, so we will always want to drive the cost to the revenue and get to the bionomic equilibrium (individually we'll do great but the whole harvesting community will do worse)[^1]. This is the "tragedy of the commons", and the only way to get out of it is mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon[^2]. Cooperators penalize heavily defectors and turns out (with the models studied) that after some threshold level of number of cooperators there is a cooperative equilibrium. The model has some weaknesses, like taking into account the cost of ostracizing.

 [^1]: I've found [this link](http://www.expertsmind.com/questions/a-model-of-fishery-bionomic-model-30125983.aspx) helpful.
 [^2]: Read Elinor Ostrom.
