---
layout: post
title: "Day 4: Processes, models and linearization"
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

# Day 4

#### Short thoughts

Emphasis on reasons for modeling (check Day 1 notes).

Relationship between pattern and process is what science looks at.

In order to understand equilibrium we have to linearize, pretend things are flat. We look at first term of Taylor expansion.

### Processes

Suppose we have \\(x_{t+1} = f(x_t)\\). This describes a process of evolution of a variable that we observe. The equilibrium happens when \\(f(x) = x\\), so the intersection between the graph of the function and the line at \\(45\\) degrees. To know whether the equilibrium is stable or not, we can use the cobwebbing method we learned in last class, but we can also look at the slope, or derivative, of the function at that point.

A particular example is \\(x_{t+1} = rx_t(1-x_t)\\) from Lorenz (make plots).

The processes can express chaotic behavior, but the statistics of the processes might be predictable.

These process can have bifurcations in their equilibriums (there may be more than one equilibrium). For example \\(x_{t+2}\\) as a function of \\(x_t\\).

We have been using linearization for studying the stability of equilibriums. When there are multiple equilibriums one may want to push above the hill of unstable equilibriums to get to another basin.

As a small guide:
If \\(f(x_{eq})=x_eq\\) we have an equilibrium. If the slope is less than one in absolute value (\\(-1< f'(x_{eq})< 1\\)) we have a stable equilibrium. If the slope is negative, there are oscillations.

Remember Taylor's Theorem:

$$f(x)=f(x_{eq})+(x-x_{eq})f'(x_{eq}) + \frac{(x-x_{eq})^2}{2}f''(x_{eq})+C(x-x_{eq})^3$$

Where \\(C\\) is just some constant (if \\(f\\) has at least three derivatives).

#### An example of a model

The model is \\(x_{t+1} = x_t + rx_t(1-\frac{x_t}{k})\\). The equilibriums are \\(x = 0\\) and \\(x = k\\). The derivative of the function is:

$$ 1 + r(1-\frac{x_t}{k}) - \frac{rx_t}{k}$$

At the equilibriums we have:

|---
|\\(x\\)|\\(F'(x)\\)|
|:----:|:----:|
|\\(0\\)|\\(1+r\\)|
|\\(k\\)|\\(1-r\\)|

\\(0\\) is an unstable equilibrium for any \\(r\\). \\(x = k\\) is a stable equilibrium if and only if \\(0< r< 2\\).
