---
layout: post
title: "Day 3: Models of population dynamics"
---
<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

## Day 3

The simplest model that we talk about here is a model that shows that the average fitness will grow over time and the equilibrium will locally maximize the average fitness of the population. Remember there are a lot of assumptions in the model, most importantly fitnesses being constant. Fitnesses can change due to many factors, for ecologists an interesting factor if fluctuations due to frequency dependence [^1,^2]. A neat example is the Hawk-Dove model. The best possible scenario is when everybody is a Dove, everybody gets \\(\frac{V}{2}\\).

### Hawk-Dove evolution

|---
| |Hawk|Dove|
|-|:----:|:----:|
|**Hawk**|\\(\frac{V-C}{2}\\)|\\(V\\)|
|**Dove**|\\(0\\)|\\(\frac{V}{2}\\)|

Remember that \\( V < C \\).

Suppose the frequencies are \\(\[ H \] = p\\), \\(\[ D \] = q = 1-p\\). The average payoff for hawks is \\( p\frac{V-C}{2} + qV \\), the average payoff for doves is \\( q\frac{V}{2} \\). If the players adapt their strategies, both of them are favored when they are rare. One might hope that there is a point in the middle where both strategies balance. The equilibrium is reached when both payoffs are equal:
$$ p\frac{V-C}{2} + qV = q\frac{V}{2} $$

Thus, \\( p\frac{V}{2} - p\frac{C}{2} + q\frac{V}{2} = 0 \\), which after some algebraic manipulations leads to \\(p = \frac{V}{C} \\). The final average payoff is \\( (1-\frac{V}{C})\frac{V}{2} \\). As one can see, this doesn't maximize the average fitness (which would be if all the population were doves).

It is important to notice that there is no pure strategy that resists invasion (puer strategy means that player only takes one action).

#### Evolutionary stable strategy

Maynard Smith formalizes this as an evolutionary stable strategy. This is a concept related to Nash equilibrium. The idea is the following, suppose there are two pure strategies \\( I, J \\) and \\( E_I(J) \\) is the expected payoff of playing \\(J\\) against \\(I\\), etc. Given a frequency of players \\(p  = \[I\] \\), the average payoff of each strategy is \\( E(I) = pE_I(I) + qE_J(I) \\). We define an evolutionary stable strategy as one that cannot be invaded by any strategy that is initially rare. For example, for \\( I \\) to be the evolutionary stable strategy, we need \\( E_I(I) > E_I(J) \\) or \\( E_I(I) = E_I(J) \\) and \\( E_J(I) > E_J(I) \\).

Let's see how this applies to the Hawk-Dove strategy. No matter how many doves or hawks there are, doves always do better against hawks than hawks, and hawks always do better against doves than doves. So no pure strategy can be the evolutionary stable strategy. Instead, the mixed strategy where we play hawk with probability \\( P = \frac{V}{C} \\) is the evolutionary stable strategy. The new strategy (called mixed \\(M\\) ) will result in the following results (in the equilibrium):


|---
| |Hawk|Dove|Mixed|
|-|:----:|:----:|:----:|
|**Hawk**|\\(\frac{V-C}{2}\\)|\\(V\\)|\\( (1-\frac{V}{C})\frac{V}{2} \\)|
|**Dove**|\\(0\\)|\\(\frac{V}{2}\\)|\\( (1-\frac{V}{C})\frac{V}{2} \\)|
|**Mixed**|\\( \frac{V}{C}\cdot\frac{V-C}{2} \\)|\\( \frac{V}{2}(1+\frac{V}{C}) \\)|\\( (1-\frac{V}{C})\frac{V}{2} \\)|

As we see, this follows the definition for evolutionary stable strategy, where the mixed strategy against itself is as good as any pure strategy (note that \\( 0 > \frac{V}{C}\cdot\frac{V-C}{2} > \frac{V-C}{2}\\)), but it does better against any of the pure strategies than the pure strategies do.

#### Dispersion vs. non-dispersion: another example

A plant could disperse its seeds, thus lowering the chances of the seeds for finding a spot, or not disperse them in which case the only hope of the plant is to keep its place, but will never be in another place.

Hamilton made a contribution to kin selection. Hamilton showed that altruism was facilitated by the haplodiploid insects. This is still debated because there are examples of diploid animals that are altruist. Maynard Smith was a student of JBS Holdane who reportedly said "I would jump at the river to save 2 siblings or 8 cousins" (share half of genes with siblings, an eigth with cousins). Hamilton accused Smith of making up this story.

### Models of population dynamics

For now we only look at the number of individuals. The simplest model just says:
$$ N_{t+1} = R N_t $$
This model leads to an exponential growth/collapse of population (insert plots). There is no equilibrium here, so if you are Thomas Malthus you must expect that \\( R(N_t) \\) will oscillate around \\( 1\\). The technique to find the equilibrium is called cobwebbing. (insert plot? All this stuff is on Hastings, page 97). A simple model that does that is called the Bevert and Holt model (?) which says
$$ N_{t+1} = \frac{R}{1+\beta N_{t}} N_t $$
We can find the equilibrium where \\( N \\) is constant, \\( \bar{N} = \frac{R\bar{N}}{1+\beta\bar{N}} \\). One of the equilibriums is \\( N = 0 \\). The other is \\( \bar{N} = \frac{R-1}{\beta} = \frac{r}{\beta} \\).

Another example we saw last week was the case of frequencies of different alleles. In that case we had \\( p' = f(p) \\) and an equilibrium we want to consider \\( \bar{p} = f(\bar{p}) \\). To know how far away I am from equilibrium I consider \\(\frac{f(p) - f(\bar{p})}{p' - \bar{p}} \\), which is approximately the derivative of \\( f(\bar{p}) \\). Indeed we can write:
$$ p' = f(p) = f(\bar{p}) + \frac{df}{dp}_{p=\bar{p}}(p-\bar{p}) $$
If the absolute value of the slope (derivative) is less than one, the equilibrium will be stable, if it is larger than one, it will be unstable.

[^1]: The best strategy may not be the best if everybody does it.
[^2]: Frequency dependence means that for a given population of a given size, how well i do with a strategy depends only on the relative proportions of how many individuals follow a strategy. Density dependence takes into account absolute numbers. Coevolution also takes into account absolute numbers of other strategies.
